# Incident: 2024-12-09 12-03-38

## Summary

From 11:47pm to 12:20pm on December 9, 2024, 100% of attempted pizza purchases failed and were not processed. This incident was triggered externally by the third-party service [Pizza Factory](https://pizza-factory.cs329.click) not accepting requests until chaos was resolved. This was a critical event as no sales could be made until the incident was resolved.

This was detected in the pizza failure metrics in Grafana and was reported through Grafana OnCall for resolution.

## Detection

One of the metrics reported to Grafana is the number of pizza failures. An alert is raised if more than one pizza has failed within five minutes. This was the means by which the DevOps team was alerted of the issue. No user tickets were submitted for this incident.

Hyrum Durfee was the first (and only) point of contact in the escalation chain. Hyrum acknowledged the issue four minutes after being notified, but was not at a place to access the Internet, which increased the downtime, and after no further purchase attempts in five minutes, the issue was automatically marked as resolved. After further purchase failures a second alert was sent, which Hyrum acknowledged within two minutes.

The time between detection and response could be reduced in this case by hiring more staff to be on-call.

## Impact

Over the course of 37 minutes, this incident affected 3 users (100% of active users), with a total of 29 purchases failing.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _11:47_ - First failed pizza purchase
- _11:49_ - First alert sent to DevOps team
- _11:51_ - First alert acknowledge by Hyrum Durfee
- _11:59_ - No more purchases made, alert automatically marked as resolved
- _12:03_ - Second alert sent to DevOps team
- _12:05_ - Second alert acknowledged by Hyrum Durfee
- _12:08_ - Verified API token for pizza factory had not expired, order creation test still failed on CI pipeline
- _12:20_ - Made GET request to apply fix
- _12:20_ - First successful pizza purchase
- _12:21_ - Verified all tests ran correctly
- _12:24_ - Incident marked as resolved by Hyrum Durfee

## Response

After being notified at 11:49am, Hyrum Durfee proceeded to a location with Internet. At 12:03pm another alert was sent. Hyrum Durfee came online at 12:05pm and was able to resolve the issue.

# Root cause

The third-party service [Pizza Factory](https://pizza-factory.cs329.click) stopped working as intended. Every request made to it received an error response until a specific GET request was made. The handling of responses from Pizza Factory needs to be updated.


## Resolution

The issue was quickly narrowed down to the 3rd-party service. The API token in GitHub Secrets was updated in case it was expired. The test to create a new order failed upon running the CI Pipeline. On putting a breakpoint upon the response of the request sent to the Pizza Factory for that particular test, it was discovered that the request's JSON contained a URL to send a GET request to. Doing so resolved the injected chaos. Further ordered pizzas were processed correctly.

To improve time towards resolution, this solution should be added to the playbook for pizza failures. Additionally, a check can be inserted into the code to automatically make that GET request if receiving that particular response.

# Prevention

No other incidents shared this same root cause.

# Action items

Hyrum Durfee is responsible for making the following changes:

1. Add this URL to the playbook
1. Add code to automatically send a GET request to the specified URL upon receipt of that particular failure from Pizza Factory, and log the event
1. Change the Grafana alert to not automatically resolve until at least one successful purchase has been made
1. Contact Pizza Factory to see what on earth they were thinking when they injected chaos into production